{
"1": "Explanation: The Sun is a mixture of many gases. Hydrogen (about 70%) and helium (about 28%). Carbon, nitrogen and oxygen make up 1.5% and the other 0.5% is made up of small amounts of many other elements like neon, iron, silicon, magnesium and sulfur.",
"2": "Explanation: Orion is the brightest and most beautiful of the winter constellations. Some of its stars, including Betelgeuse and Rigel, are among the brightest stars.",
"3": "Explanation: The Indian Institute of Astrophysics, with its headquarters in Bangalore, is a National Research Institute of India. IIA conducts research primarily in the areas of astronomy, astrophysics and related subjects. It is widely recognised as a leading research center for astrophysics in India.",
"4": "Explanation: A total lunar eclipse is sometimes called a Blood Moon, because of the reddish tinge the Full Moon takes on when fully shadowed by the Earth.",
"5": "Explanation: Hydra is the largest of the 88 modern constellations, measuring 1302.844 square degrees, and it was included by Ptolemy in his list of 48 constellations. It is one of the longest constellations, stretching more than 100 degrees across the sky.",
"6": "Explanation: The Sun's diameter is about 109 times the Earth's diameter. The Sun's mass is about 330,000 times the Earth's mass, and the gravity at the Sun's surface is 28 times the gravity at the Earth's surface.",
"7": "Explanation: Neptune is the eighth and farthest known Solar planet from the Sun. It is the fourth-largest planet by diameter, the third-most massive planet, and the densest giant planet. It is 17 times the mass of Earth, and slightly more massive than its near-twin Uranus.",
"8": "Explanation: Ursa Major is a constellation in the northern sky. Its name means \"the Great Bear\", or \"the Larger Bear\", in Latin. It is one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd-century astronomer Ptolemy, and remains one of the 88 modern constellations. In India, it is known as Saptarshi, each of the stars representing a sage.",
"9": "Explanation: The crust is the outermost solid shell of a rocky planet or natural satellite, which is chemically distinct from the underlying mantle. It is the part of the Earth that we live on, and it is made up of a variety of rocks and minerals.",
"10": "Explanation: Seismology is the scientific study of earthquakes and the propagation of elastic waves through the Earth or through other planet-like bodies. It also includes studies of earthquake environmental effects such as tsunamis as well as diverse phenomena such as seismic sources, attenuation, atmospheric and hydrological effects, and much more.",
"11": "Explanation: The lithosphere is the rigid, outermost shell of a terrestrial-type planet (or moon) that is defined by its rigid mechanical properties. On Earth, it is composed of the crust and the portion of the upper mantle that behaves elastically on time scales of thousands of years or greater. The crust is the outermost solid shell of a rocky planet or natural satellite, which is chemically distinct from the underlying mantle.",
"12": "Explanation: A solar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes between the Sun and Earth, and the Moon fully or partially blocks the Sun. This can only happen during a new moon, when the Moon is in direct alignment with the Sun as viewed from Earth.",
"13": "Explanation: Baily's beads are a phenomenon seen during total solar eclipses. As the moon completely covers the sun, the rugged lunar limb topography allows beads of sunlight to shine through in some places while being blocked in others.",
"14": "Explanation: Celestial bodies are objects in space such as the Sun, Moon, planets, and stars. They are also called astronomical bodies or heavenly bodies.",
"15": "Explanation: Lucifer is another name for the planet Venus. It is also known as the Morning Star or the Evening Star, as it is often the brightest object in the sky after the Sun and Moon. Venus is the second planet from the Sun, and it is the hottest planet in our solar system.",
"16": "Explanation: The lunar exosphere is a very tenuous atmosphere on the Moon. It is so thin that the molecules rarely collide with one another. The lunar exosphere is not in equilibrium, and the molecules are constantly being lost to space. The lunar exosphere is made up of a variety of gases, including helium, argon, neon, and sodium."
}
