1. What is the maximum period within which presidential rule must be approved by Parliament?
A) 1 month
B) 2 months
C) 3 months
D) 6 months

2. The idea of a republic in India was borrowed from which constitution?
A) British Constitution
B) United States Constitution
C) French Constitution
D) Canadian Constitution

3. Political dyarchy in the provinces was introduced by which British Act?
A) Indian Councils Act, 1861
B) Government of India Act, 1919
C) Government of India Act, 1935
D) Indian Independence Act, 1947

4. Local self-government was introduced in India for the first time in:
A) Madras
B) Bombay
C) Calcutta
D) Delhi

5. Which committee recommended a two-tier system in the Panchayat Raj system?
A) Balwant Rai Mehta Committee
B) Sarkaria Commission
C) Ashok Mehta Committee
D) Punchhi Commission

6. With respect to Article 22 on preventive detention, which of the following is NOT true?
A) The detainee must not be informed of the grounds of detention as soon as possible.
B) The detainee has no right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner.
C) The detention order is subject to judicial review by an advisory board.
D) The detainee cannot be held indefinitely without trial.

7. During an emergency, the fundamental rights under Article 19 are automatically suspended under which article?
A) Article 352
B) Article 356
C) Article 358
D) Article 359

8. The nomination of members to the Rajya Sabha has been borrowed from which constitution?
A) British Constitution
B) Irish Constitution
C) American Constitution
D) Canadian Constitution

9. The subject of cooperative societies is mentioned in which part/schedule of the Indian Constitution?
A) Part VIII
B) Part IX B
C) Seventh Schedule
D) Part XI B

10. Which constitutional amendment suggested that the President can issue multiple emergency proclamations at the same time?
A) 42nd Amendment
B) 38th Amendment
C) 44th Amendment
D) 61st Amendment

11. Which constitutional amendment introduced the Ninth Schedule?
A) First Amendment
B) Second Amendment
C) Twenty-fourth Amendment
D) Forty-second Amendment

12. The subjects (i.e. the matters on which Panchayats can legislate) are provided in:
A) Article 243F
B) Article 243G
C) Article 243P
D) Article 243O

13. Under which article can the Governor pardon a person sentenced to death?
A) Article 161
B) Article 163
C) Article 164
D) Article 166

14. Which article of the Indian Constitution recognizes Hindi in the Devanagari script as the official language of India?
A) Article 343
B) Article 344
C) Article 345
D) Article 346

15. Which article provides for the establishment of a commission for the improvement of backward classes?
A) Article 340
B) Article 341
C) Article 342
D) Article 343

16. Who was the first Speaker of independent India?
A) G. G. Deshmukh
B) G.V. Mavalankar
C) N. Sanjeeva Reddy
D) M. A. Ayyangar

17. Regarding the Delimitation Commission, which of the following statements is NOT correct?
A) Its recommendations are final and binding on both the Parliament and the State Legislatures.
B) It is constituted before every general election
C) Its composition is immune from political influence.
D) Its decisions cannot be reviewed by the judiciary.

18. In Parliament, who appoints speaker pro tem ?
A) The Prime Minister
B) The Leader of the Opposition
C) The Speaker
D) The Deputy Speaker

19. Who is regarded as the floor leader in the Parliament?
A) The Speaker of the House
B) The Leader of the House
C) The Chief Whip
D) The Leader of the Opposition

20. What is the maximum period for which a state legislative council can keep a general bill pending?
A) 6 months
B) 1 year
C) 3 months
D) 4 months

21. Who is the final authority responsible for reshuffling ministries among the members of Parliament?
A) The President
B) The Prime Minister
C) The Cabinet Secretary
D) The Leader of the Opposition

22. Who has the formal power to appoint the Tribal Welfare Minister in certain States?
A) The Chief Minister (on advice)
B) The Governor
C) The President
D) The State Legislature

23. The appointment process of a Governor in India has been taken from which constitution?
A) British Constitution
B) American Constitution
C) French Constitution
D) Canadian Constitution

24. Which authority deals with interstate water disputes in India?
A) Supreme Court under orginal and exclusive jurisdiction
B) Inter-State Water Disputes Tribunal
C) Central Water Commission
D) Ministry of Water Resources

25. Rajya Sabha along with Lok Sabha can revoke a national emergency by passing a resolution with what majority?
A) Simple majority
B) Two‑thirds majority
C) Three‑fourths majority
D) Unanimous vote
E) Special majority

26. Who has the power to create All India Services?
A) The President
B) Loksabha
C) The Prime Minister
D) Rajyasabha

27. In which landmark case was the right to privacy recognized as a fundamental right?
A) Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India
B) K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India
C) A.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras
D) Golaknath v. State of Punjab

28. Which landmark case established that the Preamble is not enforceable as a part of the Constitution?
A) Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala
B) Golaknath v. State of Punjab
C) State of Madras v. Champakam Dorairajan
D) Berubari vs union case

29. Which constitutional amendment stated that all the advice given by the Council of Ministers is binding on the President?
A) 24th Amendment
B) 42nd Amendment
C) 44th Amendment
D) 52nd Amendment

30. Who acts as the Chancellor of State Universities in India?
A) The Chief Minister
B) The Governor of the State
C) The Minister of Education
D) The Vice-Chancellor

31. Who is the father of the Planning Commission?
a) Lord lilinthgow
b) A.V Dicey
c) M. Visvesvaraya
d) M. swaminathan

32. Which rate of interest is put on short-term loans taken by commercial banks?
a) Bank Rate
b) Reverse Repo Rate
c) Repo Rate
d) Short term banking rate
33. Which is the first rural bank of India?
a) First Bank of India
b) Prathama Bank
c) State Bank of India
d) Punjab National Bank

34. What does the term 'Fiscal Deficit' mean?
a) Total revenue minus total expenditure
b) Total expenditure minus total revenue
c) Total assets minus total liabilities
d) Total liabilities minus total assets

35. What is the main objective of the 'Stand Up India' scheme?
a) Promoting digital payments
b) Promoting entrepreneurship among SC/ST and women
c) Providing housing for all
d) Providing healthcare for all

36. Which of the following is not a function of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)?
a) Issuing currency
b) Acting as banker to the government
c) Regulating foreign exchange
d) Providing loans to industries

37. What is the full form of 'IFSC' as used in banking transactions?
a) Indian Financial System Code
b) International Financial Security Code
c) Indian Fiscal Security Code
d) International Fiscal System Code

38. What is the term for the process of reducing government involvement in the economy?
a) Nationalization
b) Privatization
c) Globalization
d) Liberalization

39. Which of the following is not a direct tax?
a) Income tax
b) Corporate tax
c) Goods and Services Tax (GST)
d) Wealth tax

40. What is the main objective of the 'Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana' (PMJDY)?
a) Providing insurance coverage
b) Promoting financial inclusion
c) Providing pension benefits
d) Promoting digital literacy

41. What does the term 'Repo Rate' refer to?
a) Rate at which commercial banks borrow from RBI
b) Rate at which RBI borrows from commercial banks
c) Rate at which commercial banks lend to customers
d) Rate at which RBI lends to customers

42. Which of the following is not a component of the Human Development Index (HDI)?
a) Life expectancy
b) Education
c) Income
d) Population density

43. What is the term for the total value of goods and services produced within a country's borders in a year?
a) Gross National Product (GNP)
b) Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
c) Net National Product (NNP)
d) Net Domestic Product (NDP)

44. Which of the following is not a public sector bank in India?
a) State Bank of India (SBI)
b) Punjab National Bank (PNB)
c) HDFC Bank
d) Bank of Baroda (BOB)

45. What is the term for the economic policy of reducing trade barriers and tariffs?
a) Protectionism
b) Liberalization
c) Nationalization
d) Globalization

46. What is the main objective of the 'Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana' (PMMY)?
a) Providing loans to small businesses
b) Providing insurance coverage
c) Providing pension benefits
d) Promoting digital literacy

47. What does the term 'CRR' stand for in banking?
a) Credit Reserve Ratio
b) Cash Reserve Ratio
c) Capital Reserve Ratio
d) Current Reserve Ratio

48. Which of the following is not a function of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)?
a) Regulating stock exchanges
b) Protecting the interests of investors
c) Issuing currency
d) Regulating mutual funds

49. What is the term for the increase in the general level of prices of goods and services in an economy over a period of time?
a) Deflation
b) Inflation
c) Stagnation
d) Recession

50. What is the main objective of the 'Atal Pension Yojana' (APY)?
a) Providing insurance coverage
b) Providing pension benefits
c) Promoting financial inclusion
d) Promoting digital literacy

51. What does the term 'SLR' stand for in banking?
a) Statutory Liquidity Ratio
b) Strategic Lending Rate
c) Secured Loan Requirement
d) Standard Liquidity Reserve

52. Which of the following is not a factor of production?
a) Land
b) Labor
c) Capital
d) Money supply

53. Which of the following factors will not contribute to inflation?
a) Increase in money supply
b) High demand for goods
c) Decrease in production
d) Increase in savings

54. Who popularized the Human Development Index (HDI) in India?
a) Amartya Sen
b) Jagdish Bhagwati
c) Montek Singh Ahluwalia
d) Manmohan Singh

55. What was the primary objective of the 12th Five-Year Plan?
a) Inclusive growth
b) Agricultural development
c) Industrial expansion
d) Rural development

56. Which Five-Year Plan emphasized on food security ?
a) 9th
b) 10th
c) 11th
d) 12th

57. Which of the following is not a part of NITI Aayog?
a) Governing Council
b) Finance Commission
c) CEO
d) Vice Chairman

58. Who is the present Chief Economic Advisor of India?
a) V. Anantha Nageswaran
b) Raghuram Rajan
c) Arvind Subramanian
d) Krishnamurthy Subramanian

59. What is the rank of India in the Global Competitiveness Index?
a) 40th
b) 50th
c) 60th
d) 70th

60. What is the rank of India in the Global Happiness Index?
a) 116
b) 136
c) 126
d) 146

61. What is the full form of GST?
a) General Sales Tax
b) Goods and Services Tax
c) Government Sales Tax
d) Gross Sales Tax

62. Which of the following is not a type of unemployment?
a) Structural unemployment
b) Frictional unemployment
c) Seasonal unemployment
d) Monetary unemployment

63. What is the main objective of the 'Skill India' mission?
a) Providing financial assistance
b) Enhancing employability of youth
c) Promoting digital literacy
d) Providing healthcare services
